This diskette contains all the source code from ``The Standard C
Library,'' by P.J. Plauger (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1991). Fifteen subdirectories have names that match the standard
headers. These contain all the *.c files presented in the text.
(NOTE: Directories limits and stddef are empty.) The directory
_headers contains all the *.h files presented throughout the
text. The directory _test contains all the t*.c files presented
as test programs throughout the text.

The directory _unixvax replicates a number of these files. It also
contains the sample version of raise.c described in the running
text for the ULTRIX (UNIX VAX) operating system. The directory
_unix68k contains only the file yvals.h, modified for the GCC
compiler on Sun UNIX (680X0) workstations. That version of yvals.h
also shows how to define _CPS if you wish to use the UNIX time
system call directly. Finally, the directory _tc86 contains the
file yvals.h modified for the Turbo C++ (ANSI C) compiler.

Appendix A: Interfaces summarizes what you have to do to make
use of this code. Please note that it is NOT prepackaged ready
to go for any given operating environment.

This code is protected by copyright. You may use and redistribute
this code ONLY as part of executable images, and ONLY provided
that the following notice is included prominently in the
associated documentation and as part of the executable image:

``Portions of this work are derived from The Standard C Library,
copyright (c) 1991 by P.J. Plauger, published by Prentice-Hall,
and are used with permission.''

An authorized source for machine-readable copies of this code is:

	The C Users Journal
	R&D Publications, Inc.
	2601 Iowa
	Lawrence KS  66046
	(913) 841-1631
	(913) 841-2624 FAX

You can license the right to distribute copies of the source code
or of unlinked object modules. Contact:

	Plum Hall, Inc.
	1 Spruce Avenue
	Cardiff NJ  08232
	(609) 927-3770

The author and publisher have used their best efforts in
preparing this code. Those efforts include the development,
research, and testing of the programs to determine their
effectiveness. The author and publisher make no warranty
of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard to these
programs or the documentation contained in the book. The
author and publisher shall not be liable in any event for
incidental or consequential damages in connection with, or
arising out of, the furnishing, performance, or use of these
programs.

Notwithstanding the above, the author shall gratefully
accept any bug reports, suggested fixes, or suggestions for
improvement. Please send such information to:

	P.J. Plauger
	398 Main Street
	Concord MA  01742