                         EVOLUTION4, by R.R.YOST
                              29 JULY, 1989

	Evolution4 is a "final" revision and upgrading of Evolution3
that was included in BUGS3.ARC.  It now incorporates improvements added
by Delta Research, Phil Burk and Mike Haas and also (in Bugs3)
incorporated a number of ideas suggested by a similar program,
JITTER, by Don Reble and Chris Gray, downloaded from USENET, and
also available on CompuServe and Fred Fish Disk #201. The basic
idea for the program was conceived by Michael Palmiter, a high
school teacher from Temple City, CA.  It was described by A. K.
Dewdney in his column, Computer Recreations, in Scientific
American, May, 1989.

	A few words on the background of Evolution4:  The program
simulates evolution (or adaptation).  "Bugs" move around the
computer screen, eating "Bacteria", which gives them "energy" for
motion.  Each bug has 6 "genes", which determine the bug's
response to a "turn stimulation" signal applied before each step
of motion.  The turn stimulation is a random number and the set of
genes determine the relative probability that the bug will react
to the stimulation by changing its direction of travel by 0, 60,
120, 180, 240, or 300 degrees. A bug's genes do not change, but if
he survives long enough (measured in terms of the moves he has
made) and has accumulated enough energy, he splits into two
"children", whose genes are copied from their parent, but are
slightly altered.  One child has a random one of his 6 genes cut
in half, while the other has a random (probably different) gene
doubled.  These modifications may make a child better adapted at
finding bacteria, enabling him to survive and pass on his genes to
his offspring.

	A bug always starts with 40 energy units, and gains 40 each
time he "eats" a bacterium.  Each move costs him 1 energy unit. He
is mature enough to split if he has completed 200 moves and is
strong enough if his energy is greater than 400 units.  He is
limited to 600 energy units.

	He dies if his energy reaches zero, or if his "age" exceeds
2000 moves.  The bugs are maintained in a circularly linked list
that requires a minimum of two bugs, so the last two bugs do not
die when their energy reaches zero, and their subsequent movements
do not cost them any energy.  As will be seen below, when the
number of bugs is small, an excess of bacteria are supplied, so
the population of two bugs will eventually grow.

	The bacteria are scattered uniformly over the screen in the
"normal" mode, but in a "Garden of Eden" mode, they are
concentrated in one area.  With the uniform distribution, bugs
evolve that tend to move straight ahead, or (occasionally seen)
have a nearly equal chance of turning 60 or 300 ( - 60) degrees. 
This occurs because a twirling bug soon eats all the bacteria in
his neighborhood, then cannot move to more remote areas.  In the
Garden of Eden mode, the bugs survive better if they stay near the
high concentration, so bugs evolve that tend to turn one
direction, or else by 180 degrees.

	Bacteria are supplied at a controllable rate per total
movements of all the bugs.  The default rate is 1 per twice the
number of bugs in existence.  As a bug must capture 1 bacterium
each 40 moves, the default feed rate will support about 20 bugs,
but the number of bugs on the screen will fluctuate considerably.

	My version of this program was written in a version of the
Forth computer language,  JForth Professional V2.0, for the Amiga
A2000 with AmigaDOS V1.3.  JForth is available from Delta
Research, PO Box 1051, San Rafael, CA 94915, (415)-485-6867.  The
load module, Evolution4, has been stripped of all JForth
proprietary matter and IS FREELY DISTRIBUTABLE, with appropriate
credit given to the author.  THE SOURCE FILE IS SIMILARLY NON-
PROPRIETARY AND IS HEREBY RELEASED IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN.

	To run the program, from the CLI or Shell, type the name,
EVOLUTION4  followed by pressing the <return> key.  The program can
also be run from the WorkBench by clicking on its icon.  750 bacteria
will first be scattered over the screen, then ten bugs will appear
and start moving about.  A bug's color indicates the state of his
energy, as follows:  White indicates the energy is 120 units or
higher, red indicates an energy level between 40 and 120, while
black indicates an energy level less than 40 units, possibly
foretelling approaching death.  Offspring will usually immediately
turn black, making splitting fairly easy to detect.

[Note: The colors indicated may be different on your screen, depending
on the settings in your preferences file.]

	The screen includes 3 "buttons", white rectangles labelled Inc.,
Dec., and Uniform/Conc. Clicking once in these rectangles has the
following effects:

     Inc. : Increases the rate at which bacteria are added. The number
            of bugs that can be supported at the survival level by the
            added bacteria is reported on the screen.

     Dec. : Decreases the rate at which bacteria are added.

     Uniform/Conc : Toggles between the uniform distribution mode and
                    the "Garden of Eden" mode.


    The program can be exited by clicking in the close
gadget in the upper left corner of the display screen.

	In the Garden of Eden mode, bacteria are deposited in a
pseudo-Rayleigh distribution (x and y are generated by summing 12
uniformly distributed random numbers) in the center of the window. 
If a selected position is occupied by another bacterium or a bug,
another location is tried.  However, after 10 tries, the attempt
to place a bacterium is abandoned.  Thus, when the area gets
painted solid, the rate of supply falls off. Apparently for this
reason, it seems to be better to use the Inc. button  to
increase the bacteria supply rate in the Garden of Eden mode.
No bacteria are fed to the rest of the screen.

	When a button is clicked and also when a split or death occurs,
the number of bugs on the screen is reported, and the averages of their
six genes are listed, under headings of the corresponding degrees (ccw)
of turn.  The genes are reported as decimals that add to 1.0.
(Actually, the genes are stored in the bug structure as 6 accumulations
of integers and their total; the probability of a given turn is related
to the difference between the corresponding gene as stored and the
preceding gene;this approach permits integer processing and enhances
processing speed.)

	The bacteria feed rate is also listed.  The distribution mode
is evident from the pattern of the bacteria.

